TITLE:
The influence of core group turnover in high-prevalence HIV epidemics: mechanistic insights from transmission modeling

(118/125 characters)

AUTHORS:
Jesse Knight
Linwei Wang
Huiting Ma
Stefan D Baral
Sheree Schwartz
Sharmistha Mishra

ABSTRACT:

Background: Heterogeneity in the risks of HIV/STI acquisition and transmission are central to core group theory. We examined the influence of including population turnover among risk groups on the estimated HIV intervention impact and the contribution of the unmet needs of core groups to overall transmission.

Methods: We developed an analytical approach to modeling risk group turnover that leverages available demographic data and ensures constant relative population size across risk groups. We incorporated this approach into a deterministic model of heterosexual HIV transmission with three risk-groups, including one representative of sex work. We simulated epidemics with various rates of turnover projecting overall HIV prevalence of 2-38%. We then compared the impact of turnover on the projected: equilibrium HIV prevalence across groups; impact of reducing duration of infectiousness via effective treatment; and the transmission population attributable fraction (tPAF) of high-risk women to cumulative HIV infections in the total population over time.

Results: Turnover consistently decreased HIV prevalence in the core-group due to shorter periods of risk, and increased HIV prevalence among the lowest risk group due to movement of infected individuals from core to periphery. The influence of turnover on overall HIV prevalence depended on several factors, including baseline treatment rates. Turnover also reduced the treatment rate required to achieve epidemic control. After calibrating to group-specific HIV prevalence, a model with turnover consistently projected a higher tPAF of high-risk women versus a model without turnover. This was because turnover requires greater heterogeneity in transmission risks between core and lower risk groups to achieve the same HIV prevalence ratios between the groups.

Discussion: Population turnover through risk groups will influence the dynamics of HIV/STI transmission at a population-level. Models without core group turnover may underestimate intervention impact, as well as the importance of prioritizing core groups for interventions to reduce overall HIV/STI transmission.

(301/300 words)
